Enh: Add tests pages - run tests in ci and locally to guide (#145)
pyOpenSci/python-package-guide: tests/run-tests.md

On this page, you will learn about the tools that you can use to both run tests in isolated environments and across
Python versions.

### Tools to run your tests

There are three types of tools that will make is easier to setup and run your tests in various environments:

1. A **test framework**, is a package that provides a particular syntax and set of tools for _both writing and running your tests_. Some test frameworks also have plugins that add additional features such as evaluating how much of your code the tests cover. Below you will learn about the **pytest** framework which is one of the most commonly used Python testing frameworks in the scientific ecosystem. Testing frameworks are essential but they only serve to run your tests. They won't allow you to run tests across Python versions without additional automation tools (see automation tools below).

> 2. **Automation tools** allow you to automate running workflows such as tests in specific ways using user-defined commands. For instance it's useful to be able to run tests across different Python versions with a single command. Tools such as [**nox**](https://nox.thea.codes/en/stable/index.html) and [**tox**](https://tox.wiki/en/latest/index.html) also allow you to run tests across Python versions. However, it will be difficult to test your build on different operating systems using only nox and tox - this is where continuous integration (CI) comes into play.

Author: really good point! i do see nox as an automation tool that happens to be AWESOME at running tests too. and we will show using it to build docs and such too so... let's call it an automation tool for all things packaging. does that land well with you?

> 2. **Automation tools** allow you to automate running workflows such as tests in specific ways using user-defined commands. For instance it's useful to be able to run tests across different Python versions with a single command. Tools such as [**nox**](https://nox.thea.codes/en/stable/index.html) and [**tox**](https://tox.wiki/en/latest/index.html) also allow you to run tests across Python versions. However, it will be difficult to test your build on different operating systems using only nox and tox - this is where continuous integration (CI) comes into play.

Author: Ok here is what i did! that diagram was messy so i turned it into a table that we can easily update. i moved nox into a separate automation tool column and we can go back and forth on the final version to ensure we're happy with it once i have pushed all of the new edits from this review up! i'll mark this as resolved for now and we can revisit if need be when looking at hte final version of the edited pages.

3. **Continuous Integration (CI):** is the last tool that you'll need to run your tests. CI will not only allow you to replicate any automated builds you create using nox or tox to run your package in different Python environments. It will also allow you to run your tests on different operating systems (Windows, Mac and Linux). [We discuss using CI to run tests here](tests-ci).

:::{figure-md}
![Figure showing three boxes - the first hasTest Frameworks in it, the second Test Runner and the third Continuous Integration....](../images/test-tools.png)

There are three types of tools that will help you develop and run your tests. Test frameworks like pytest
provide syntax and a **framework** for you to write and

> run tests. Test runners automate processes such as creating isolated environments to run your tests in, and running tests across Python versions with a single command. Finally Continuous integrate (CI) is a generic platform where you can run your tests across operating systems. CI allows you to run your tests on every PR and commit to ensure iterative checks as contributors suggest changes to your code.

Author: agreed. it's been removed since i now have a table here!

:::

## What testing framework / package should I use to run tests?

We recommend using `Pytest` to build and run your package tests. Pytest is the most common testing tool used in the Python ecosystem.

[The Pytest package](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/) also has a number of
extensions that can be used to add functionality such as:

- [pytest-cov](https://pytest-cov.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) allows you to analyze the code coverage of your package during your tests, and generates a report that you can [upload to codecov](https://codecov.io/).

[Learn more about code coverage here.](code-cov)

```{note}
TODO: add note about running tests in vscode, breakpoints and –no-cov flag. Then link to tutorial that explains how to deal with this.
```

## Run tests using pytest

If you are using **pytest**, you can run your tests locally by
calling:

`pytest`

> Or if you want to run a specific test file - let's call this file "filename.py" - you can run:
> 
> `pytest filename.py`

Reviewer: For slightly more realism, I would call it `test_module.py`, as that is the default prefix that pytest recognizes.

```suggestion
Or if you want to run a specific test file - let's call this file "test_module.py" - you can run:

`pytest test_module.py`
```

* [**make:**](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html) Some developers use Make, which is a build automation tool, for running tests
due to its versatility; it's not tied to a specific language and can be used
to run various build processes. However, Make's unique syntax and approach can
make it more challenging to learn, particularly if you're not already familiar
with it. Make also won't manage environments for you like **nox** will do.
```

## Run tests across Python versions with nox

**Nox** is a great automation tool to learn give it is:

- Python-based making it accessible if you already know Python and
- It will create isolated environments to run workflows.

`nox` simplifies creating and managing testing environments. With `nox`, you can
set up virtual environments, and run tests across Python versions using the environment manager of your choice with a
single command.

> 

Reviewer 2: It might be worth having an admonition clarifying
> Although nox is a python package and must be installed in a Python environment, it does not have to be installed in all (or any) of the Pythons used for testing. Nox is capable of managing these Python environments externally.

Author: good call. i've adjusted the text just a bit 

```
:::{note} Nox Installations 
When you use nox to run tests across different Python versions, nox will create and manage individual `venv` environments for each Python version that you specify in the nox function. It will setup everything that you need to run tests in each environment for you. 
:::
```

Nox can also be used for other development tasks such as building
documentation, creating your package distribution, and testing across various

> environment managers such as `conda` and `pip`.

Reviewer 2: `pip` is really not an environment manager. Did you mean `virtualenv`? Or were you calling out testing different package indexes?

Author: i hear you. Maybe package manager. i'm not sure what words are correct here. 

there are PyPI installs and conda installs. But conda is an environment manager and a package manager i think whereas pip is a package manager / build tool. 🤯 

i think what i'm trying to get at here is that you can run nox in conda envts for conda packages and pypi / pip / venv ...add all of the other envt tools that are on the pypi / non conda side of things here... 

what words would you use for that? maybe 

> testing across various
packaging ecosystems such as `conda` and `pip`.

Author: or

> Nox can also be used for other development tasks such as building
> documentation, creating your package distribution, and testing installations 
> across both PyPI related environments (e.g. venv, virtualenv) and `conda` (e.g. `conda-forge`).

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I like that second edit a lot. It's still conflating PyPI with the environment manager, but that might be okay here. Also, you don't have the tools ordered the same way - it should be "virtualenv (PyPI) and conda (conda-forge)" (or the other way around).

Maybe we can take the best of both your edits
> Nox can also be used for other development tasks such as building
documentation, creating your package distribution, and testing installations
across different package ecosystems, such as PyPI (using venv) and conda-forge (using conda).

(I dropped `virtualenv` because there is no other mention of it in this guide; it could just confuse new readers. Though it might be good somewhere to have a cheat sheet for `venv`, `virtualenv`, `pipenv`, `pipx`, etc. It's a very common confusion for new Pythonistas)

## Test Environments

By default, `nox` uses the Python built in `venv` environment manager. A virtual environment (`venv`) is a self-contained Python environment that allows you to isolate and manage dependencies for different Python projects. It helps ensure that project-specific libraries and packages do not interfere with each other, promoting a clean and organized development environment.

> An example of using nox to run tests in `venv` environments for Python versions 3.9, 3.10 and 3.11 is below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An example of using nox to run tests in `venv` environments for Python versions 3.9, 3.10, 3.11 and 3.12 is below.
```

```{warning}

> Note that for the code below to work, you need to have all 3 versions of Python installed on your computer for `venv` to find.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that for the code below to work, you need to have all 4 versions of Python installed on your computer for `nox` to find.
```

Author: i always conflate nox and venv because it's so seamless but this is a way more accurate fix that you've implemented here given nox is using venv not actually creating the envt!

```

### Nox with venv environments

```{admonition} TODO:
TODO: add some tests above and show what the output would look like in the examples below...
```

Below is an example of setting up nox to run tests using `venv` which is the built in environment manager that comes with base Python.

Note that the example below assumes that you have [setup your `pyproject.toml` to declare test dependencies in a way that pip

> can understand](../package-structure-code/declare-dependencies.md). And example of that setup is below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
can understand](../package-structure-code/declare-dependencies.md). An example of that setup is below.
```

```toml

> [project]

Reviewer 2: Maybe `project.name` `project.version` and `build-system` should also be put in this example, so it is fully self-contained.

Author: fixed!!

dependencies = [
  "geopandas",
  "xarray",
]

[project.optional-dependencies]
tests = ["pytest", "pytest-cov"]
```

If you have the above setup, then you can use `session.install(".[tests]")` to install your test dependencies.
Notice that below one single nox session allows you to run

> your tests on 3 different Python environments (Python 3.9, 3.10, 3.11, and 3.12).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
your tests on 4 different Python environments (Python 3.9, 3.10, 3.11, and 3.12).
```

```python
import nox

# For this to run you will need to have python3.9, python3.10 and python3.11 installed on your computer. Otherwise nox will skip running tests for whatever versions are missing

@nox.session(python=["3.9", "3.10", "3.11", "3.12"])
def test(session):

> # install
> session.install(".[tests]")
> 
> # Run tests
> session.run("pytest")

Reviewer: I believe indentation is necessary here, otherwise you get a syntax error.

```suggestion
    # install
    session.install(".[tests]")

    # Run tests
    session.run("pytest")
```

Author: oh indentation is definitely needed! great catch!

```

Above you create a nox session in the form of a function
with a `@nox.session` decorator. Notice that within the decorator you declare the versions of python that you
wish to run.

> To run the above you'd use the command where `-s` stands for

Reviewer 2: you could also just use the long option `--session`

Author: fixed!

> session. Your function above is called test there for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
session. Your function above is called test, therefore
```

:og:title: A random title
---

# Run your tests

Running your tests is important to ensure that your package
is working as expected. However, it's also important to think about your code running, not only on your computer, but also on the computers of your users who may be running various Python versions and using various operating systems. Thus, you will want to consider the following when running your tests:

1. Run your test suite in a series of environments that represent the Python versions and operating systems your users are likely to have.
2. Running your tests in an isolated environment ensures that they do not pass randomly due to your computer's specific setup. For instance, you might have locally installed dependencies that are not declared in your package's dependency list. This oversight could lead to issues when others try to install or run your package on their computers.

On this page, you will learn about the tools that you can use to both run tests in isolated environments and across
Python versions.

### Tools to run your tests

> There are three types of tools that will make is easier to setup and run your tests in various environments:

Author: fixed! i went with categories :)

> 1. A **test framework**, is a package that provides a particular syntax and set of tools for _both writing and running your tests_. Some test frameworks also have plugins that add additional features such as evaluating how much of your code the tests cover. Below you will learn about the **pytest** framework which is one of the most commonly used Python testing frameworks in the scientific ecosystem. Testing frameworks are essential but they only serve to run your tests. They don't provide a way to easily run tests across Python versions without additional automation tools (see automation tools below).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. A **test framework**, is a package that provides a particular syntax and set of tools for _both writing and running your tests_. Some test frameworks also have plugins that add additional features such as evaluating how much of your code the tests cover. Below you will learn about the **pytest** framework which is one of the most commonly used Python testing frameworks in the scientific ecosystem. Testing frameworks are essential but they only serve to run your tests. These frameworks don't provide a way to easily run tests across Python versions without the aid of additional automation tools.
```

    - <i class="fa-solid fa-xmark fa-xl" style="color: #afb3bb;"></i>
    - <i class="fa-solid fa-xmark fa-xl" style="color: #afb3bb;"></i>
    - <i class="fa-solid fa-xmark fa-xl" style="color: #afb3bb;"></i>
    - <i class="fa-solid fa-circle-check fa-xl"></i>
*   - Use for other automation tasks (e.g. building docs)
    - <i class="fa-solid fa-xmark fa-xl" style="color: #afb3bb;"></i>
    - <i class="fa-solid fa-xmark fa-xl" style="color: #afb3bb;"></i>
    - <i class="fa-solid fa-circle-check fa-xl"></i>
    - <i class="fa-solid fa-circle-check fa-xl"></i>
:::

## What testing framework / package should I use to run tests?

We recommend using `Pytest` to build and run your package tests. Pytest is the most common testing tool used in the Python ecosystem.

[The Pytest package](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/) also has a number of
extensions that can be used to add functionality such as:

- [pytest-cov](https://pytest-cov.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) allows you to analyze the code coverage of your package during your tests, and generates a report that you can [upload to codecov](https://codecov.io/).

:::{todo}
[Learn more about code coverage here.](code-cov)
:::

```{note}

> TODO: add note about running tests in vscode, breakpoints and –no-cov flag. Then link to tutorial that explains how to deal with this.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Your editor or IDE may add additional convenience for running tests, setting breakpoints, and toggling the `–no-cov` flag. Check your editor's documentation for more information.
```

Reviewer 3: Instead of leaving as a todo, let's give some guidance. We can always expand later.

Author: good idea. i ran into this with setting up vscode to troubleshoot bugs in our tests and wanted to atlest acknowledge it!

```

## Run tests using pytest

If you are using **pytest**, you can run your tests locally by
calling:

`pytest`

> Or if you want to run a specific test file - let's call this file "test_module.py" - you can run:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Or if you want to run a specific test file - let's call this file "`test_module.py`" - you can run:
```

`pytest test_module.py`

> Learn more from the [get started docs here](https://docs.pytest.org/en/7.1.x/getting-started.html).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Learn more from the [get started docs](https://docs.pytest.org/en/7.1.x/getting-started.html).
```

Running pytest on your computer is going to run your tests in whatever
Python environment you currently have activated. This means that tests will be
run on a single version of Python and only on the operating system that you
are running locally.

> This is a great start to making your Python package more robust! However, your users may be using your package on different

Reviewer 3: Perhaps remove this paragraph completely. It seems repetitive and may add reader confusion. The next paragraph sums it up nicely.

Author: ok i've cleaned this up. i added a small admonition about the next page covering running tests across operating systems!

versions of Python. Or they also may use other operating systems.

An automation tool can simplify the process of running tests
in various Python environments.

### Tools to automate running your tests

To run tests on various Python versions or in various specific environments with a single command, you can use an automation tool such as `nox` or `tox`.

> Both `nox` and `tox` can create an isolated virtual environment that you define. This allows you to easily run your tests in multiple environments and across Python versions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Both `nox` and `tox` can create an isolated virtual environments. This allows you to easily run your tests in multiple environments and across Python versions.
```

* [**make:**](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html) Some developers use Make, which is a build automation tool, for running tests
due to its versatility; it's not tied to a specific language and can be used
to run various build processes. However, Make's unique syntax and approach can
make it more challenging to learn, particularly if you're not already familiar
with it. Make also won't manage environments for you like **nox** will do.
```

## Run tests across Python versions with nox

**Nox** is a great automation tool to learn because it:

- Is Python-based making it accessible if you already know Python and
- Will create isolated environments to run workflows.

`nox` simplifies creating and managing testing environments. With `nox`, you can
set up virtual environments, and run tests across Python versions using the environment manager of your choice with a
single command.

> :::{note} Nox Installations

Author: good point. i'm not sure if a beginner would get confused with that additional information or whether it would be useful. i hadn't thought about that before because nox just always worked! if you have suggestions for how to word it in a way that it doesn't make  the user more confused i'm open to that!

```python
import nox

# For this to run you will need to have python3.9, python3.10 and python3.11 installed on your computer. Otherwise nox will skip running tests for whatever versions are missing

@nox.session(python=["3.9", "3.10", "3.11", "3.12"])
def test(session):

    # install
    session.install(".[tests]")

    # Run tests
    session.run("pytest")

```

Above you create a nox session in the form of a function
with a `@nox.session` decorator. Notice that within the decorator you declare the versions of python that you
wish to run.

To run the above you'd use the command where `--session`. You may also see
people using the shortcut for session `-s`. Your function above
is called test, therefore the session name is test.

```
nox -s test
```

### Nox with conda / mamba

Below is an example for setting up nox to use mamba (or conda) for your
environment manager.
Note that unlike venv, conda can automatically install
the various versions of Python that you need. You won't need to install all three Python versions if you use conda/mamba, like you do with `venv`.

```{note}
For `conda` to work with `nox`, you will need to
install a conda-friendly version of Python. We suggest

> the mamba-forge installation.

Reviewer 2: I couldn't find any mention of this in the nox project. It seems to only require `conda` or `mamba` be pre-installed. But I haven't used it as the env manager before - is this advice coming from elsewhere?

Author: @ucodery that may be coming from me and it also may be wrong. i always have a conda version of python installed so i may be confused! 

For nox to work across python versions i had to download and install python 3.x, 3.x+1 etc from python.org. so i think i made the jump that for conda to work you'd need to have a conda installation of Python. But you are saying that if you have the packages installed (`conda` or `mamba`) with a python.org installation of python that conda will be able to produce a new environment accordingly?

Author: ok i have fixed this. i removed the conda installation and just said - you need to have conda or mamba installed on your computer. it's really funny how we create mental models of how things work that aren't necessarily based on how they actually do work. but that model works for us until someone asks the right question! :)

More on that here...<link to tutorial??>
```

```python
import nox

# The syntax below allows you to use mamba / conda as your environment manager, if you use this approach you don’t have to worry about installing different versions of Python

@nox.session(venv_backend='mamba', python=["3.9", "3.10", "3.11", "3.12"])
def test_mamba(session):
    """Nox function that installs dev requirements and runs
    tests on Python 3.9 through 3.12
    """

    # Install dev requirements

>     session.install(".[tests]")

Author: fixed! i missed the conda_install method in the docs!

    # Run tests using any parameters that you need
    session.run("pytest")
```

To run the above session you'd use:

```bash

> nox -s test_mamba

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
nox --session test_mamba
```

```{warning}
Note that for the code below to work, you need to have all 4 versions of Python installed on your computer for `nox` to find.
```

### Nox with venv environments

```{todo}
TODO: add some tests above and show what the output would look like in the examples below...
```

Below is an example of setting up nox to run tests using `venv` which is the built in environment manager that comes with base Python.

Note that the example below assumes that you have [setup your `pyproject.toml` to declare test dependencies in a way that pip
can understand](../package-structure-code/declare-dependencies.md). An example
of that setup is below.

```toml
[build-system]
requires = ["hatchling"]
build-backend = "hatchling.build"

[project]
name = "pyosPackage"
version = "0.1.0"
dependencies = [
  "geopandas",
  "xarray",
]

[project.optional-dependencies]
tests = ["pytest", "pytest-cov"]
```

If you have the above setup, then you can use `session.install(".[tests]")` to install your test dependencies.
Notice that below one single nox session allows you to run
your tests on 4 different Python environments (Python 3.9, 3.10, 3.11, and 3.12).

> ```python

Author: Gosh very good catch! that was totally missing. i just added it in a few places!
